Data Science and Advanced Programming – Project Proposal
Name: Francisco Manuel Lameiras dos Santos
Student Number: 25415282
Project Title : Predicting Stock Returns Using Momentum Strategies
Category : Statistical Analysis Tools / Business & Finance Tools
Motivation : When choosing a portfolio allocation for stocks, a momentum strategy is based on the premise that recent « winners » tend to outperform recent « losers » in the market. Still, integrating the strategy in portfolio optimization remains a challenge and it is not always clear if it is a good indicator. With this project I intend to verify how well momentum-based return predictions allow for effective portfolio allocation. 
Planned Approach : I will collect the most complete data of stock market returns I can find. Initially I will get my data from the university’s CEDIF. I will train the models in different periods using a walk-forward method. First, I will use data from 01/01/2015 to 31/12/2019 and test the model for the year 2020. Then, I will keep adding a year and testing on the next, for example include data until 31/12/2020 and test on 2021, until I reach 31/10/2025. Then I will estimate basic momentum features such as how much the stocks have increased or decreased for and then using machine learning regression I will try to predict short-term future returns. For the momentum features I will use different lookback windows (1-month, 3-month, 6-month, and 12-month), to identify which holds more predictive power. I will start with simple linear regression to produce initial conclusions and then use more complex models such as LASSO, random forest and XGBoost. I want to also run a multiple regression by adding other factors such as market volume and volatility to improve predictions. These models will be compared against the baseline of a naïve forecast and a pure momentum-only strategy without ML. 
For visualization purposes I want to use NumPy, scikit-learn, and matplotlib to sketch graphs and present the results in a clean way.
Expected challenges : The first challenge I will face when working with stock return data is noisy data. That is why I want to use more robust regression methods that can regularize the data and avoid overfitting random variations. Missing data can also be a challenge as I want to use a large number of stocks and ideally get the most frequent data possible, which of course will lead to gaps in the dataset. 
Success Criteria : The success of  the project is mainly determined by how the models perform against baselines, according to standard regression metrics like MAE, RMSE, and R².In addition. Moreover, I want the code to run smoothly and for the results to be presented in an organized and aesthetic manner.
Stretch goals : My extra goal, if time allows, is to build a simple interface where the user can choose some preferences regarding their portfolio and the program returns an optimized portfolio allocation based on what was inputted. Another goal would be to allow for more personalized choices, but for that I will need to go back to the predictive models and maybe change the data, for example, if I want to create portfolios based on regional preferences.
